# WSN
WSN 
Introduction
Initially, the sensors are electromechanical detectors for the analysis of mathematical abstractions. In the first environment thermostats, their earliest use can be traced back to 1933[1]. Earlier micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) composed of the dual-chip, with various chips and bundles containing a detector, circuits, and mechanical systems. The effect was higher volume, higher costs and less sensor output [2]. Recent developments in MEMS and the integrated circuit (IC) have allowed narrow-scale sensons to be built and their actuators and electronics incorporated into a high-performance cost-efficient device. Such sensors have developed over the recent decade to become autonomous sensors that include a small-size battery-powered, on-board processor, storage and transceiver. Those sensors created a node in the Wireless Sensor Network (WSN).
The small node has two advantages: firstly, small production expenses and secondly, simple and low installation costs. The cost of a WSN node usually varies in hundreds to thousands of dollars, but it is expected that the technology and mass manufacturing developments will reduced to a few dollars [3]. The small size and inexpensive of the node enable the installing phase where nodes, depending on the request, can be installed at random or specifically mounted.
The WSN is marked as a powerful and cost-effective solution to various research problems in these low-cost knots with processing, storage and sensing capability and its advantageous architecture that offers a less networking capacities. They have coordination for the sensing and storage of data in a distributed framework. Important information is transmitted to a WSN sink data collector or a server station through a multi-hop ad hoc network that serves as a gateway for a static network. WSN updates include Wireless Sensor and Actuator Network nodes ([4, 5]), remote nodes on wireless sensor and actuator (WSANs) [3] or Multimedia content controller nodes such as audio and video sharing and still photos in the Wireless Multimedia Sensor Network (WMSN) [6].
The Sensor Network is a type of wireless network engineering, combined with sensor, micro-motor and computer systems, and able to collect, process and transmit information. Figure 1 displays the design of a standard WSN [7] with three elements, the sensor node, and the control node. The sensor nodes represent the network hardware foundation and the sensor network center. They have three positions. Next, the data processing is done as a gathering system for on-site information. Second in a certain manner they move the information collected in the field to other nodes or centers of information processing. Third, together with the control module, all command features are introduced. In fact, other applications require additional functions for sensor nodes, usually like tracking systems, vibration or actuators, energy regeneration units, etc.
A large number of sensor Nodes are distributed arbitrarily within or close the monitoring region using the distribution, artificial setup, or execution of the rocket in the sensor networks and constitute the network in a self-organizing way. Via wireless single or multiple hop contact the information tracked by the sensor node is transmitted to the sink node and then the sink node transmits it through the Internet to the task management system, the mobile communication network, satellite communication and other networks, the data collected is ultimately analyzed by a remote user. Sensors nodes will take the double task of terminals and routes within the typical network into account throughout the entire network, but also collect, process and transmit data.[8] 
Figure 1: architecture of WSN [8]


Applications of WSNs
Tracking, tracking and command are tools of WSNs. WSNs are used mainly to regulate ecosystems, track artifacts, and manage nuclear reactors, fire and traffic. Zone surveillance is a significant general use of WSNs where the WSN is located in an area that may be affected by an accident. For example, a wide variety of sensor nodes can be mounted on the war field to identify enemy intrusions instead of landmines. If a case (heat, stress, noise, illumination, electro-magnetic current, vibrations, etc.) is observed, at least one of the base stations should be told of the major event, which may also serve as necessary (e.g. submitting a text electronically or even satellite). In the water / wastewater sectors, WSNs are commonly used. Unwired electricity or data transfer infrastructure can be tracked by way of commercial wireless I / O systems and solar panel nodes or battery packs. In order to identify vehicle presence for traffic tracking, WSNs are able to use multiple detectors. For industrial greenhouses, WSNs can also be used to monitor degrees of temperature and humidity. If humidity and temperature fall below a certain degree, the greenhouse operator may be alerted via emailed or cell telephone or host systems may activate misting systems, open vents, initially switching on fans or monitor a large number of device responses. Due to the ease of downloading certain WSNs, it was also easy to move when the software needs changed [9].
Several WSN applications are available: 
1.	System Management: Region management utilizes WSNs very often. The WSN is used for field surveillance in a zone where certain anomalies are usually tracked. A military instance would be the use of detectors to track enemy intrusion; the geo-fencing of pipelines with gas or oil is a civilian illustration. The important part is field management.
2.	Medical monitoring: There may be two forms of medical applications: mobile and embedded. Wearable devices are attached to the human body or perhaps next to the consumer. The implants in your skin are the implantable medical devices. Many other technologies are usable, such as body position and individual condition analysis, cumulative observation of ill patients in hospitals and in homes.
3.	Environmental / Earth sensing: Samples of environmental parameters are given below in various applications for monitoring. They face any further problems from harsh environments and rising electricity supply. Environmental control polluting: WSNs are used for tracking the influence of toxic gasses to people in several cities (Stockholm, London and Brisbane). Instead of wired systems, they can use unpredictable wireless connections to allow readings accessible in various areas.
4.	Forest Fire Detection: A Sensor Nodes network is usually placed in a forest to determine when a fire has begun. The nodes created by fire within the trees or vegetation are usually sensors that measure temperature, humidity and energy. The first warning is important for the firemen to be successful; the fire brigade will recognize when the fire starts, as a consequence of the use of the WSNs.
5.	Landslide warning: A WSN sensing device is used to track subtle surface motions and modifications in different parameters before or throughout a landslide. Landslide detection the data collected can allow the existence of slides to be identified before they actually occur.
6.	The management of water quality: it involves the study of water properties in reservoirs, streams, lakes and oceans and also in underground water supplies. Water quality control: The use of various remote dispersed sensors enables an objective water status map to be generated and the permanent installation of monitoring stations in challenging access areas, without manual recovery.
7.	Natural Disaster Prevention: WSNs may effectively act in order to avoid disaster outcomes such as flooding. In waterways that need to be tracked in real time, mobile nodes have been deployed successfully.
8.	Industrial surveillance: 
a.	Computer health monitoring: WSNs have been designed to help devices for repair dependent on condition (CBM), as they provide considerable personal savings and enable new features. Wireless sensors are now possible to reach previously inaccessible sites, moving equipment, unsafe or prohibited locations and mobile property.
b.	Data recording: WSNs are also used to capture web data for tracking environmental information; often just as effectively as temperature monitoring in a very refrigerator or water level in overflow tanks in nuclear plants. The statistical data is then used to demonstrate how the systems work. WSNs profit primarily from the' real' data feed that is available with traditional logger.
c.	Monitoring of high water quality and water level requires various tasks, including the quality control of drinking water and surface water, including maintaining the water infrastructure in a community to serve both humans and animals. Protecting water waste may be beneficial.
d.	Structural safety surveillance: WSNs enable you to track civil infrastructure fitness and related geophysical processes in real time, with the aid of properly interfaced sensors, over very long periods of time and through data logging [10] .
Standards of WSN
Different criteria of WSNs have been adopted. There are also several original and non-standard frameworks and configurations in relation to the guidelines.
A. Zigbee 
The ZigBee Cooperation is the group of companies that manage the ZigBee standards across. ZigBee provides a set of high-level routing protocols based on IEEE 802.15.4 using low-power wireless radios. ZigBee's software was planned to be easier and cheaper than most device WPANs, for example Bluetooth. ZigBee focuses on devices with low data speed, long battery service life, and safe networking for radio regular (RF) applications. The low cost enables remote command and tracking systems to use this software extensively.
1) Elementary Structures
ZigBee is a higher protocol level configuration which follows the 802.15.4 standard for physical (PHY) and mid-access control (MAC) levels. The method is based upon the algorithm AODV (Ad-hoc on-demand remote vector). This implies that this routing protocol [11] allows for filtering, exploration and peer-to-peer interaction. Topologies are provided for mesh networking. There is not a frequency hopping necessary for every node on the same channel [12]. Within ZigBee protocol there are two types of Network devices, such as Full-Function Devices (FFD) and Reduced Function Devices (RFD). FFD can only create networks with a full functions node [12], such as cluster, star and hybrid.
In both physically and non-phoned mode, ZigBee can work. The nodes are grouped in beaconed mode and the super system is split into 16 locations. Up to seven of these are devoted to certain knots, called Guaranteed Slot Time (GTS), to improve determinism [12].
2) Protocol devices:
•	Controller-This role is network initiating and managing. The manager stores network data, including the function of a Trust Center and security key database.
•	Router-These systems expand network area coverage and provide automatically routing to barriers. For situations of network congestion or service malfunction they also provide alternative routes. The controller and other routers can be linked and children's phones can also be supported.
•	End Devices–Such devices may send or receive a message without routing. The manager or the router must be linked, and the child devices cannot be assisted [13].
3) Authentication and validation
Authenticity and authentication protection services is given, but safety is not necessary. Throughout 802.15.4, ZigBee incorporates security mechanisms; throughout contrast to the ability to use only authentication and/or just authenticity, the CBCMAC (CCM) counter of AES-128 encrypting. Nevertheless, the protection of the MAC layer is not expressly protected by 802.15.4. In the Zigbee safety mechanism, three main categories are applied: Controller, Connection and Network. To link to the network, the master key is requested. The connecting key is used for enclosure from end to end and delivers the maximum level of security at the cost of higher storage needs. The network key offers the benefit of reduced storage needs for phones. The main core or coordinator can be used for both buttons. The trust center will actually control the installation of new appliances and refresh the network key regularly [13]. The use of series numbering methods is used to secure replay attacks [12].
B. WirelessHART
WirelessHART is a 2.4 GHz ISM radio band mesh network system. This uses packet-by-packet IEEE 802.15.4-compatible channel-hopped DSSS radios. The backward compatibility of WirelessHART with key Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) software is used to connect and manage network device-to-network communications. Data Link Layer for the TDMA Software specifies the timing and frequency to be used for inter device communication [14]. Such ties are organized in a super frame that repeats periodically to help both cyclical and acyclic communication. A link may be created or exchanged in order to enable flexible bandwidth use to ensure reduced latency of data.
1) Basic Features
The mutual 2.4-GHz SPAS Spectrum (FHSS), which enables WirelessHART to jump through 16 channels specified by IEEE 802.15.4, coexists. The standard features are widely used with WirelessHART. CCA (Clear Channel Assessment) in WirelessHART is an optional feature which may be conducted prior to message transmission [14]. In addition, WirelessHART has another transmit power feature. The use of other networks called blacklisting is not enabled by this function. Such capabilities mean that WirelessHART does not conflict with other wireless systems which co-exist in real-time. The routing features of all WirelessHART systems are similar with regard to networking, deployment, practice, and expansion [12].
Throughout Wire1essHART there are two distinct routing protocols, namely map routing and origin routing. Graph routing utilizes pre-set routes for routing a message to a target device from an origin. Link routing utilizes ad-hoc communications without offering a variety of routes. For network diagnostics, this routing protocol is used and does not process corresponding messages [15].
2) Router Systems Core Wireless HART components: 
•	Gateway-Provides host network connectivity. Modbus-Profibus-Ethernet is used to connect WirelessHART and the primary host. The Gateway gives the network and security administrator as well [16].
•	Network Manager-Constructs the graph network and manages it. The slot control identify the best methods of transmitting and controls the time allocation of a slot (Wire1essHART splits each second into ten-second slots)
•	Security Manager-Distributes authentication keys for protection. The process includes measuring instruments-HART-enabled tool-and provides a list of approved devices to enter the grid [16].
•	Repeater-WirelessHART routes but cannot have a separate system link. It would be primarily used to extend the Wire1essHART network's reach. Routing features were given for all devices in the Wireless HART network [17].
•	Adapter-connects to an external HART instrument for passing data on the instrument to the host via a WirelessHART network. This connector can be put anywhere through the 4-20mA cable of the device, can be operated by the battery or can be driven with the cable 4-20Ma. Many adapters are operated by the batteries and are driven also with the same battery [17].
•	Terminal-Access to an external WirelessHART network-Used for linking to a new instrument. The terminal is attached to the gateway and then to a diagnostic instrument [16].
3) Security
WirelessHART mandatory safety. Wire1essHART provides data encryption and contact verification on the network and data-link layers for end-to-end and hop-to-hop security measures. For email authentication and encryption [12], AES-128 block cipher symmetric keys are used. There is a set of security keys for secure contact. Before each computer enters the network, a new device is equipped with a link button. The Security Manager manages the internal key creation and storage, as well as user and network keys for further interaction. An end-to-end connection between two computers is authenticated by a network layer with a session button. For each contact in pairs, a session key is added. A network key for authenticating messages on a single hop is used in the Data Link layer [12].
References 
[1]	(1995-2012, 11/18). History of Innovation. Available: http://www.ti.com/about-ti/company/history.html
[2]	H. Weinberg. (11/18). MEMS (Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems) Technology. Available: https://www.sensorland.com/HowPage023.html
[3]	I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, "A survey on sensor networks," IEEE Communications magazine, vol. 40, pp. 102-114, 2002.
[4]	I. F. Akyildiz and I. H. Kasimoglu, "Wireless sensor and actor networks: research challenges," Ad hoc networks, vol. 2, pp. 351-367, 2004.
[5]	F. Xia, "QoS challenges and opportunities in wireless sensor/actuator networks," Sensors, vol. 8, pp. 1099-1110, 2008.
[6]	I. F. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, and K. R. Chowdhury, "A survey on wireless multimedia sensor networks," Computer networks, vol. 51, pp. 921-960, 2007.
[7]	P. Medagliani, G. Ferrari, V. Gay, and J. Leguay, "Cross-layer design and analysis of WSN-based mobile target detection systems," Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, pp. 712-732, 2013.
[8]	L. Wang, J. Yan, T. Han, and D. Deng, "On Connectivity and Energy Efficiency for Sleeping-Schedule-Based Wireless Sensor Networks," Sensors, vol. 19, p. 2126, 2019.
[9]	V. Tam, K.-Y. Cheng, and K.-S. Lui, "Using Micro-Genetic Algorithms to Improve Localization in Wireless Sensor Networks," JCM, vol. 1, pp. 1-10, 2006.
[10]	F. Zhao, L. J. Guibas, and L. Guibas, Wireless sensor networks: an information processing approach: Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
[11]	T.-W. Song and C.-S. Yang, "A connectivity improving mechanism for ZigBee wireless sensor networks," in 2008 IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing, 2008, pp. 495-500.
[12]	T. Lennvall, S. Svensson, and F. Hekland, "A comparison of WirelessHART and ZigBee for industrial applications," in 2008 IEEE International Workshop on Factory Communication Systems, 2008, pp. 85-88.
[13]	P. Radmand, A. Talevski, S. Petersen, and S. Carlsen, "Comparison of industrial WSN standards," in 4th ieee international conference on digital ecosystems and technologies, 2010, pp. 632-637.
[14]	W. Du, J. Deng, Y. S. Han, S. Chen, and P. K. Varshney, "A key management scheme for wireless sensor networks using deployment knowledge," in IEEE INFOCOM 2004, 2004.
[15]	J. Song, S. Han, A. Mok, D. Chen, M. Lucas, M. Nixon, et al., "WirelessHART: Applying wireless technology in real-time industrial process control," in 2008 IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium, 2008, pp. 377-386.
[16]	(2007, 11/18). HART Communication Foundation. Available: http://www.hartcomm.orglindex.htrnl
[17]	(2009, 11/18). "The Components of WirelessHART Technology. Available: http://www.hartcomm.orglindex.htrnl,


